---
title: "Ethnic Studies Library Transition"
thumbnail: "https://d1b7k5w7yjwpfg.cloudfront.net/iiif/2/bibliopolitica_CSL00105_CSL00105_001/full/800,/0/default.jpg"
number: 5
date: 2024-04-05
layout: exhibit
lang: en
permalink: "/exhibit/{{ lang }}/{{ number }}.html"
tags: exhibit-en
featured_items:
  - id: CSL00008
    label: Goals of the Ethnic Studies Libraries (1993)
    caption: Library staff from the Asian American Studies Library, Native American Studies Library, and Chicano Studies Library stated their combined missions and goals and presented them to the faculty of the Ethnic Studies Department. 
  - id: CSL00024
    label: Stephens Hall Space Meeting- Nov. 21, 1994
    caption: Lillian Castillo-Speed advocated for the new Ethnic Studies Library to have sufficient space for its operations, staff and collections. 
  - id: CSL00103
    label: Lillian Castillo-Speed packs the office
    caption: Castillo-Speed packs the Chicano Studies Library office in preparation to move to the new space in Stephens Hall. 
  - id: CSL00104
    label: Lillian Castillo-Speed Opening Remarks
    caption: Castillo-Speed speaks at the Ethnic Studies Library opening celebration.
  - id: CSL00105
    label: Opening of the Ethnic Studies Library
    caption: Library staff stand before attendees at the Ethnic Studies Library opening celebration on July 18, 1997
---
In 1969, the Associated Students of the University of California (ASUC) at Berkeley instituted a student fee to support the new programs that made up the Ethnic Studies Department.  Historically, each program gave the majority of those funds to maintain its own small library, apart from African American Studies which became its own department in 1970. From the 1970s to the early 1990s, The Chicano Studies Library, the Asian American Studies Library, and the Native American Studies Library occupied spaces in Wheeler Hall. In the early 90s, the university administration asked the Ethnic Studies Department to consider moving the three libraries to Stephens Hall in order to create more classroom space in Wheeler Hall.

The three library teams met to discuss how the new space in Stephens Hall could be used. They came to an agreement that each library would be transformed into a distinctive collection within a larger single library structure, creating the Chicano Studies Collection, the Asian American Studies Collection and the Native American Studies Collection as well as a new Comparative Ethnic Studies Collection. Maintaining the separate identities and histories of each former library was important. While all the collections are housed within the same space, the Chicano Studies Collection is still classified using its own system, the Chicano Classification System.  All staff members were retained with each formerly independent librarian now in charge of their own collection.  While the libraries were not allocated as much library space as they initially hoped for, additional on campus storage space allowed for equal space provision between each of the collections and room for them to grow. Then Ethnic Studies Chair, Elaine Kim, decided the name of the combined libraries would be “The Ethnic Studies Library.” Lillian Castillo-Speed became Head Librarian of the Ethnic Studies Library and on July 18th, 1997, with speeches from the Ethnic Studies faculty and other administrators, the Ethnic Studies Library opened its doors to the public. 
