---
title: "Origins"
thumbnail: "https://k72crxgprmvffblzrwqo7atzei0xdqkx.lambda-url.us-east-1.on.aws/iiif/2/bibliopolitica_CSL00049_CSL00049_003/full/800,/0/default.jpg"
number: "1"
layout: exhibit
permalink: "/exhibits/1.html"
tags: exhibit
featured_items:
  - id: CSL00046
    label: The Strike Explained
    caption: This booklet introduced the Third World Liberation Front and the demands and tactics of the Third World Liberation Front Strike
  - id: CSL00052
    label: Strike Demands
    caption: A list of the Third World Liberation Front Demands
  - id: CSL00047
    label: No Progress Report - Updates on University's progress with TWLF
    caption: A report from the TWLF Central Committee on the meetings detailing the lack of progress with university officials
  - id: CSL00048
    label: TWLF protest photographs
    caption: Photographs of the TWLF strike in front of Sproul Hall and at the entrance to Sather Gate
  - id: CSL00049
    label: Additional TWLF protest photographs
    caption: Photograph of the TWLF demonstration as covered in the Daily Cal campus newspaper, photos of the confrontation with police, and a photo of a demonstration on Bancroft Avenue, a street that borders the entrance to the University
  - id: CSL00043
    label: Chicano Studies UC Berkeley 1982-83
    caption: A Chicano Studies Program pamphlet includes a description of the Chicano Studies Library
---

The Chicano Studies Library was an outgrowth of the Chicano Movement. Its founding is rooted in the Third World Liberation Front (TWLF) Strike that took place on the UC Berkeley campus in 1969. The TWLF was a coalition of African American, Native American, Mexican American, and Asian American groups. During the strike, students demanded that the university confront racism on campus and create a Third World College; a separate college with multiple departments and its own dean. Activists called on the university to recruit and maintain faculty, staff and students from marginalized groups. Amidst extreme police violence and institutional pressures, the students held their ground. After 10 weeks, the strike ended. While a separate Third World College was not realized, a Department of Ethnic Studies was created with programs in Native American Studies, Afro-American Studies, Asian American Studies and Chicano Studies.

A key organizer of the strike, The Mexican American Student Confederation (MASC), anticipated and planned for the establishment of a fully functioning Chicano library. In 1969, the Associated Students of the University of California (ASUC) approved a student fee to provide funding for the 4 newly formed programs within the Ethnic Studies Department. Chicano Studies Program Coordinator, Myrtha Chabrán directed a portion of these funds to develop the library. Initially known as La Raza Library, the Chicano Studies Library (CSL) was never just a place to conduct research and collect Chicanx materials. It was a tool for social justice that was made possible by and for communities on and off campus. The objective was not only to found and organize a library, but to bring people together to make concrete change. 
