---
title: "A Chicano Studies Library"
thumbnail: "https://d1b7k5w7yjwpfg.cloudfront.net/iiif/2/bibliopolitica_CSL00080_CSL00080_001/full/800,/0/default.jpg"
number: "2"
layout: exhibit
permalink: "/exhibits/2.html"
tags: exhibit
---
In the 1960s Chicanx students did not see themselves in the main Berkeley library despite the fact that it was regarded as one of the finest libraries in the nation. In their classrooms and in the publications they read, their culture and experience were summed up as problems: for example, the problem of migrant labor or the problem of Spanish speaking children in schools.  Collecting materials to counter that perspective was essential. Students, with support from the emerging Chicano Studies Program developed a Chicano Studies library. The new library was located in a small room in Dwinelle Hall and was initially composed of a few bookshelves and file cabinets that contained student papers, local community bulletins, and ephemera. Students brought in materials they collected from community events and would hang out in this space, talking, making plans and studying. 

Professor Oswaldo Asturias was the first coordinator of La Raza Studies at UC Berkeley.  Asturias asked author Lucha Corpi, who was a work study student at the time, to devote part of her working hours to identifying and obtaining books for the library. According to an early departmental org chart, Corpi became the library’s first coordinator in 1971. As the collection grew and became more well known on campus, students began to apply to work at the library.  Student workers welcomed library visitors at a small desk and helped them locate materials while also working on specific tasks such as compiling bibliographies, assisting with collection development, materials processing and searching for relevant materials across the Berkeley libraries system. In 1972, architecture student Jose Antonio Arce became the coordinator and played a major role in shaping how materials would be classified. Arce worked closely with John Gonzales, another student worker who worked to build a serial collection. Gonzales collected newspapers, journals, magazines and bulletins,  and developed what became an internationally sought after Latino serial collection. The first official archivist of the Chicano Studies Program, Gonzales documented the early history of the department and also compiled several published bibliographies. 

In 1973, anthropology student Richard Chabrán began working at the library after Arce suggested he join their team. Chabrán was tasked with caring for the serials collection. Chabrán remembers that “This [work] was really important for me because I came to realize that those newspapers represented the voices of communities across the country that you don't often hear or read about. They were an education for me.” Chabrán originally intended to become an anthropologist, however he was drawn into librarianship through working at the Chicano Studies Library. Chabrán explains that working at the library was “an opportunity to acknowledge that I had not learned the history of my people the way I thought it should be taught. [It was] an opportunity to develop that history, and to develop those resources, so that not just my community, but the world would know it. That was a big inspiration for me. I wanted to become a librarian, but it was with a very particular purpose.” Chabrán obtained his masters degree in Library and Information science and became the library’s coordinator in 1975. During his time at the library, Chábran led many pivotal projects that put the Chicano Studies Library on the map as one of the nation’s leading Chicanx collections. In recognition of his work and the growing significance of the library, faculty from the Chicano Studies Program successfully petitioned the university administration to formalize and officially recognize the coordinator position in 1977. When Chabrán left the library in 1979, librarians Francisco García-Ayvens (coordinator from 1980-1984) and Lillian Castillo-Speed (coordinator from 1984-1992, Head of the Ethnic Studies library and Chicano Studies Librarian from 1992-today) built on the work that others started.  

Throughout the 70s and 80s, the library continued to grow, housing materials and cultivating programs that were unavailable elsewhere. The Chicano Studies Library staff and faculty collected posters, ephemera and bulletins- materials that were important to their community but not always valued by other kinds of libraries. Library staff were not limited by or concerned with previous conceptions of what a library should be. The entire library represented a world that was missing in other libraries and on campus. Staff were empowered to act on behalf of wider communities as part of a collective struggle.
