---
title: "The Chicano Library Today: A Living Legacy"
thumbnail: "https://d1b7k5w7yjwpfg.cloudfront.net/iiif/2/bibliopolitica_CSL00022_CSL00022_001/full/800,/0/default.jpg"
number: "6"
layout: exhibit
permalink: "/exhibits/6.html"
tags: exhibit
---
For 50 years, the Chicano Studies Library has been a home for knowledge, activism and community. With the sales of books, microfilmed newspapers and Chicano Database royalties, the Chicano Studies Library, and now the Ethnic Studies Library, have remained somewhat self-sufficient. The library’s autonomy and roots in community allowed it to thrive and to achieve many ambitious projects through the power of collective action.

While the Chicano Studies Library initially created collections, services and programs to meet the needs of local communities, its reach is much wider. Visiting scholars from around the world have traveled to study its unique collections. Authors of groundbreaking works acknowledge that their research would have been impossible without the Chicano Studies Collection or the support of Chicano Studies Library staff. The library’s achievements grew out of students and workers wanting to gather materials, learn from them, and make them available for others. They found books, journals, posters, artworks and videos that were important for their sense of identity and community justice. The Chicano Studies Library was not ruled by the practices of mainstream librarianship and cleared its own path to meet the needs of its communities. It was not ruled by precedent, so it could create its own ways of knowing, collecting, organizing, describing, and publishing.  In the end they could say: this is ours.
